README.md, before:

# sapconf_saptune_check

> :warning: 
> This script is obsolete and will not give correct results with sapconf 5 and saptune 3! 
> The sapconf part is available in the sapconf package (>=5.0.2) as `sapconf_check` and the saptune part in the saptune packae (>=3.0.0) as `saptune_check`.



This tool checks if sapconf or saptune is set up correctly. +
It will check among other things

  * the package versions,
  * the status of the systemd services of sapconf and tuned,
  * the tuned profile,
  * the sapconf profile (sapconf v5),
  * if solutions or notes are applied for saptune
  * for leftover configs from package updates 
  * for .rpmnew/.rpmsave files of configs

In case of a misconfiguration some hints are given to rectify the problem.
Please follow the hints from top to down to mitigate side effects.

**It will not dig deeper to check if the tuning itself is working correctly!**

## Usage
```
sapconf_saptune_check overview|sapconf|saptune
```

## Examples

Just getting an overview:
```
# ./sapconf_saptune_check overview

This is sapconf_saptune_check v1.0.0.

It verifies if sapconf or saptune are set up correctly.
Please keep in mind:
 - Only *one* of both can be used at the same time!
 - This tool does not check, if the tuning itself works correctly.
 - Follow the hints from top to down to minimize side effects.


Package overview
================
[NOTE]  tuned has version 2.4.1
[NOTE]  sapconf has version 4.1.14
[NOTE]  saptune has version 2.0.3

Systemd unit overview
=====================
[NOTE]  tuned.service is active
[NOTE]  tuned.service is enabled
[NOTE]  sapconf.service is inactive
[NOTE]  sapconf.service is disabled

Profile overview
================
[NOTE]  tuned profile is saptune
[NOTE]  saptune configuration is missing
[NOTE]  saptune is configured for version: 2
```

A sapconf check with everything perfect:
```
# ./sapconf_saptune_check sapconf


This is sapconf_saptune_check v1.0.0.

It verifies if sapconf or saptune are set up correctly.
Please keep in mind:
 - Only *one* of both can be used at the same time!
 - This tool does not check, if the tuning itself works correctly.
 - Follow the hints from top to down to minimize side effects.


Checking sapconf (tuned-less)
=============================
[ OK ]  sapconf package has version 5.0.0
[ OK ]  sapconf.service is active
[ OK ]  sapconf.service is enabled
[ OK ]  tuned.service is inactive
[ OK ]  tuned.service is disabled

Sapconf is set up correctly.
```

Not so well in case of saptune:
```
# ./sapconf_saptune_check saptune

This is sapconf_saptune_check v1.0.0.

It verifies if sapconf or saptune are set up correctly.
Please keep in mind:
 - Only *one* of both can be used at the same time!
 - This tool does not check, if the tuning itself works correctly.
 - Follow the hints from top to down to minimize side effects.


Checking saptune (tuned-based)
==============================
[ OK ]  saptune package has version 2.0.3
[FAIL]  sapconf.service is active               --> Run 'systemctl stop sapconf.service' to stop the tuning now.
[FAIL]  sapconf.service is enabled              --> Run 'systemctl disable sapconf.service' to deactivate sapconf at boot.
[ OK ]  tuned package has version 2.4.1
[FAIL]  tuned.service is inactive               --> Run 'saptune daemon start' to start the tuning now.
[FAIL]  tuned.service is disabled               --> Run 'saptune daemon start' to enable tuned at boot.
[FAIL]  No solutions or notes applied           --> Run 'saptune solution|note apply <id>' to configure saptune.
[WARN]  /etc/sysconfig/saptune-note-1275776 is not used by this version. Maybe a leftover from an update?        --> Check the content and remove it.
[WARN]  /etc/sysconfig/saptune-note-1557506 is not used by this version. Maybe a leftover from an update?        --> Check the content and remove it.
[WARN]  /etc/sysconfig/saptune-note-SUSE-GUIDE-01 is not used by this version. Maybe a leftover from an update?  --> Check the content and remove it.
[WARN]  /etc/sysconfig/saptune-note-SUSE-GUIDE-02 is not used by this version. Maybe a leftover from an update?  --> Check the content and remove it.
[WARN]  /etc/sysconfig/saptune.rpmsave found. This is a leftover from a package update!  --> Check the content and remove it.

5 warning(s) have been found.
5 error(s) have been found.
Saptune will not work properly!
```


## Exit Codes
| exit code | description                                                                    |
|-----------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|     0     | All checks ok. Sapconf/saptune have been set up correctly.                     |
|     1     | Some warnings occured. Sapconf/saptune should work, but better check manually. |   
|     2     | Some errors occured. Sapconf/saptune will not work.                            |
|     3     | Wrong parameters given to the tool on commandline.                             | 


## Changelog

|    date    | version  | comment                                     |
|------------|----------|---------------------------------------------|
| 24.06.2019 | v0.1     | First release.                              |
| 24.06.2019 | v0.1.1   | Small bug fixed / Some messages rephrased   |
| 25.06.2019 | v0.1.2   | Disclaimer added                            |
| 22.11.2019 | v0.1.3   | Bug fix: Now handles missing rpm packages   |
| 02.07.2020 | v1.0.0   | Rework to fix some bugs regarding missing packages and support for tuned-less sapconf  |
| 03.07.2020 | v1.1.0   | Searches for obsolete leftovers from updates and warns if deprecated profiles, SAP Notes or Solutions are used |
| 03.07.2020 | v1.1.1   | Bug fix: We terminate with an error if saptune v1 is discovered and if saptune v3 detected  |
| 05.07.2020 | v1.2.0   | Added printing a note if a tuned profile in /etc has been found and messed up invalid/mandatory files in compile_filelists() cleaned |
| 08.01.2021 | v1.2.1   | Bug fix: Support of changed sapconf profile path (>= 5.0.1). |
| 15.01.2021 | v1.2.2   | Bug fix: Profile test for sapconf only on SLES 12 (new function os_version) |

Commit message:

v1.2: Will deny execution by pointing to sapconf_check and saptune_check if sapconf >=5.0.2 and saptune >=3 are installed

README.md, after:


> :warning:  **This script is obsolete and will not give correct results with sapconf 5 and saptune 3!** 
> **The sapconf part is available in the sapconf package (>=5.0.2) as `sapconf_check` and the saptune part in the saptune package (>=3.0.0) as `saptune_check`.**

# sapconf_saptune_check

This tool checks if sapconf or saptune is set up correctly. +
It will check among other things

  * the package versions,
  * the status of the systemd services of sapconf and tuned,
  * the tuned profile,
  * the sapconf profile (sapconf v5),
  * if solutions or notes are applied for saptune
  * for leftover configs from package updates 
  * for .rpmnew/.rpmsave files of configs

In case of a misconfiguration some hints are given to rectify the problem.
Please follow the hints from top to down to mitigate side effects.

**It will not dig deeper to check if the tuning itself is working correctly!**

## Usage
```
sapconf_saptune_check overview|sapconf|saptune
```

## Examples

Just getting an overview:
```
# ./sapconf_saptune_check overview

This is sapconf_saptune_check v1.0.0.

It verifies if sapconf or saptune are set up correctly.
Please keep in mind:
 - Only *one* of both can be used at the same time!
 - This tool does not check, if the tuning itself works correctly.
 - Follow the hints from top to down to minimize side effects.


Package overview
================
[NOTE]  tuned has version 2.4.1
[NOTE]  sapconf has version 4.1.14
[NOTE]  saptune has version 2.0.3

Systemd unit overview
=====================
[NOTE]  tuned.service is active
[NOTE]  tuned.service is enabled
[NOTE]  sapconf.service is inactive
[NOTE]  sapconf.service is disabled

Profile overview
================
[NOTE]  tuned profile is saptune
[NOTE]  saptune configuration is missing
[NOTE]  saptune is configured for version: 2
```

A sapconf check with everything perfect:
```
# ./sapconf_saptune_check sapconf


This is sapconf_saptune_check v1.0.0.

It verifies if sapconf or saptune are set up correctly.
Please keep in mind:
 - Only *one* of both can be used at the same time!
 - This tool does not check, if the tuning itself works correctly.
 - Follow the hints from top to down to minimize side effects.


Checking sapconf (tuned-less)
=============================
[ OK ]  sapconf package has version 5.0.0
[ OK ]  sapconf.service is active
[ OK ]  sapconf.service is enabled
[ OK ]  tuned.service is inactive
[ OK ]  tuned.service is disabled

Sapconf is set up correctly.
```

Not so well in case of saptune:
```
# ./sapconf_saptune_check saptune

This is sapconf_saptune_check v1.0.0.

It verifies if sapconf or saptune are set up correctly.
Please keep in mind:
 - Only *one* of both can be used at the same time!
 - This tool does not check, if the tuning itself works correctly.
 - Follow the hints from top to down to minimize side effects.


Checking saptune (tuned-based)
==============================
[ OK ]  saptune package has version 2.0.3
[FAIL]  sapconf.service is active               --> Run 'systemctl stop sapconf.service' to stop the tuning now.
[FAIL]  sapconf.service is enabled              --> Run 'systemctl disable sapconf.service' to deactivate sapconf at boot.
[ OK ]  tuned package has version 2.4.1
[FAIL]  tuned.service is inactive               --> Run 'saptune daemon start' to start the tuning now.
[FAIL]  tuned.service is disabled               --> Run 'saptune daemon start' to enable tuned at boot.
[FAIL]  No solutions or notes applied           --> Run 'saptune solution|note apply <id>' to configure saptune.
[WARN]  /etc/sysconfig/saptune-note-1275776 is not used by this version. Maybe a leftover from an update?        --> Check the content and remove it.
[WARN]  /etc/sysconfig/saptune-note-1557506 is not used by this version. Maybe a leftover from an update?        --> Check the content and remove it.
[WARN]  /etc/sysconfig/saptune-note-SUSE-GUIDE-01 is not used by this version. Maybe a leftover from an update?  --> Check the content and remove it.
[WARN]  /etc/sysconfig/saptune-note-SUSE-GUIDE-02 is not used by this version. Maybe a leftover from an update?  --> Check the content and remove it.
[WARN]  /etc/sysconfig/saptune.rpmsave found. This is a leftover from a package update!  --> Check the content and remove it.

5 warning(s) have been found.
5 error(s) have been found.
Saptune will not work properly!
```


## Exit Codes
| exit code | description                                                                    |
|-----------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|     0     | All checks ok. Sapconf/saptune have been set up correctly.                     |
|     1     | Some warnings occured. Sapconf/saptune should work, but better check manually. |   
|     2     | Some errors occured. Sapconf/saptune will not work.                            |
|     3     | Wrong parameters given to the tool on commandline.                             | 


## Changelog

|    date    | version  | comment                                     |
|------------|----------|---------------------------------------------|
| 24.06.2019 | v0.1     | First release.                              |
| 24.06.2019 | v0.1.1   | Small bug fixed / Some messages rephrased   |
| 25.06.2019 | v0.1.2   | Disclaimer added                            |
| 22.11.2019 | v0.1.3   | Bug fix: Now handles missing rpm packages   |
| 02.07.2020 | v1.0.0   | Rework to fix some bugs regarding missing packages and support for tuned-less sapconf  |
| 03.07.2020 | v1.1.0   | Searches for obsolete leftovers from updates and warns if deprecated profiles, SAP Notes or Solutions are used |
| 03.07.2020 | v1.1.1   | Bug fix: We terminate with an error if saptune v1 is discovered and if saptune v3 detected  |
| 05.07.2020 | v1.2.0   | Added printing a note if a tuned profile in /etc has been found and messed up invalid/mandatory files in compile_filelists() cleaned |
| 08.01.2021 | v1.2.1   | Bug fix: Support of changed sapconf profile path (>= 5.0.1). |
| 15.01.2021 | v1.2.2   | Bug fix: Profile test for sapconf only on SLES 12 (new function os_version) |
| 27.10.2021 | v1.3     | Will deny execution by pointing to sapconf_check and saptune_check if sapconf >=5.0.2 and saptune >=3 are installed |
